All right.
Hello welcome to another lecture we're going to be learning a new skill here and once we learn this
we're going to be applying it to making another app but let's just focus on what this lectures about
and that is timer's how you can make your code delayed to only run at a certain point or repeat to run
over and over again at certain time intervals.
OK.
So let's go ahead and get started.
We're going to start a new project I'm just going to call this timer demo and we'll go ahead and make
this project so I'm going to show you two different ways that you can make timers you can kind of decide
which one you think is best.
And you'll see how we use them moving forward.
But just wanted to introduce you to a couple of ways to do this.
I'd also like to take this time to note if you ever want to change the layout of Android studio you've
probably seen I've bumped up the font size here on this.
You can go up to Android studio preferences.
This is if you're on a Mac but even on Windows and Linux I believe you can still get to your preferences
as long as you get to the preference pane you want to go down to editor into where the fonts and colors
are.
Go down to the font and you can increase the size and a bunch of other things too.
But I just want to show you how to do that in case you were interested.
All right.
So let's go ahead and talk about the first way to work with a timer and that's by using something called
a handler and a runnable.
OK.
So what we're going to do first is we're going to make a handler and the handler basically allows us
to do some timing functions.
So what we're going to do is we're going to create a handler.
And we're going to give us some sort of name.
Let's just be kind of bland here we'll just call her handler handler when you say this should be a new
handler.
Excellent.
Then with this handler we have to create a runnable that says you know here's some code that I want
to run.
So the handler runs the Runnable.
I know that's kind of little bit chunky there but we'll work through it.
So we're going to create a runnable so it'll do runnable.
OK so we have a new runnable which we'll just call run.
We're going to set this equal to a new runnable.
Excellent.
And you can see it's created this function for us called Run which basically this is the code that is
going to get run here.
Let me put an end in semi-colon there.
So yeah our handler is going to run the code inside of this runnable and we can decide what that's going
to be.
So let's go ahead and write our code for now which is let's just log out something so we're going to
say log I just say hey it's us and we're also going to be say like a second has passed by we're going
to make a timer that runs every second so a second has passed by excellent.
Now with this what we're going to do is they're going to say after we've logged this information we
then want to schedule the handler to say hey go ahead and run this runnable again after X amount of
time.
So in order to do that we reference the handler and then we say Dot post delayed.
You can see that down there and you have to pass it a runnable which in this case if we just say this
it's going to refer to the Runnable that we're in now.
So we'll say this and then we have to give it a certain amount of time now it will refer to time in
milliseconds so 1000 essentially equals one second.
So when we say hey it's us a second has passed by you know we're And then it says OK run the same thing
in 1000 milliseconds.
This means it's going to run every second day.
So this looks all fine and dandy but if we were to go ahead and run this right now on our emulator nothing
would happen because we've created this Hebler we've created this runnable that sort of you know reregistered
the handler every time it does its thing it says hey I'm going to schedule myself to run again I'm going
to schedule myself to run again.
Right.
Like you know that works.
But at some point we've got to kick off the process and we haven't done that yet.
So what we would need to do in order for that to happen is simply to like what we had here.
We would say händler dot instead of post Alade we would just say post but we do have to pass the rentable
which in this case we called rhumb So go ahead and say run and that's all we've got to do.
Okay.
So now that this code actually has a position to start Let's go ahead and run this looks like are emulators
still coming online here.
But let's go ahead and make sure that we're running this new version.
Yeah we want to we want to restart the up well I guess let's let's give the emulator here a second to
get itself up and running.
All right so the emulator finally got ready to rock and roll here.
Let's go ahead and open up log can see what we got and look at that.
We've got a second pass by it's showing up and you know we've got every second here.
So that is good news.
Means we're ready to rock and roll.
All right.
So this is one way that we can do a timer so let's go ahead and just comment this out because I have
another way that I want to show you can go ahead and just do the line comment there.
And the next way that we're going to learn how to do a timer is something called a countdown timer so
I preferred this method more than doing the handler in the Runnable that the handler in the Runnable
those can be more useful in some situations that aren't just for timers.
So I think that was a good skill to learn but this would be my more preferred way about doing timer's
of course up to you how you want to handle that but just go ahead and we're going to create a new countdown
timer and we're not going to pass it into a variable anything create a new variable we're just going
to create this and have it run its course one time.
So we're going to see a new countdown timer.
Make sure you've got the one from Android OS.
And in this new count down timer there's a couple of things we've got to pass and so you can see how
many milliseconds you want this thing to ultimately run for.
So if we wanted to run for 10 seconds we would pass ten thousand milliseconds and then it's going to
ask you for the countdown interval meaning like how often do you want to check back in with you.
So if you want to every one second do something you would pass in 1000 milliseconds.
Now if you want to you know every tenth of a second be able to run some code well in that case you would
want to do just like 100 there.
But you know I think we should just have this run every second for 10 seconds so let's go ahead and
do that.
And we actually don't want a semi-colon here.
We want our opening curly bracket and then adding curly brackets at the end of that is where we'll put
our semi-colon.
Now with this countdown timer we have to implement two functions so the first one.
Let's go ahead and just say public void.
This one is going to be called on tick case so this one is going to get called every time this countdown
interval has been reached again you can choose what this is going to be right now since it's a thousand
milliseconds it's going to be every second second.
We're going to have on tick called.
But inside of here what's going to be passed is a long which is basically a really big event.
And we're just going to go ahead and call this milah seconds until done OK.
So this is kind of telling us you know how much further we have on what's going on.
So we're going to go ahead and log this information.
So we'll do our capital log on.
All right.
And we'll say seconds left and let's go ahead and say how many seconds left.
If you think about it we've got milliseconds and we want to show them as seconds we should divide that
by 1000.
All right.
Now if we're going to do this we've got to turn this into a string.
So we're going to say string dot value and we'll go ahead and pass that information in there.
And in parentheses and a semi-colon Let's give ourselves some space to look at this code here.
Okay.
So that's one function that we've got there the next one that we want to do is on finish.
So let's do public voyde on the capital and finish here gang.
And this is going to be run whenever the countdown timer is completely finished so we're going to go
ahead and do a log here or forget to do the capital on that and we'll say something like we're done.
Exclamation point.
No more countdown.
OK.
So you can see this sort of timer is more geared towards counting down to a particular point in time
where is this just sort of ran on into the future you would probably want to add this sort of time or
have some sort of if statement saying hey after this thing has happened or whatever I want to end this
thing you know doing something every one second until the end of time.
So anyways something to note there.
And yeah let's just go ahead and test this right.
So in a hit run here let's get Lague that open.
Oh we forgot our semi-colon.
Make sure we've got that.
But I guess by having that air it opened up blog for us so that was kind of nice.
Here comes our app.
I don't know where we're looking at the screen it doesn't do anything.
Oh and we don't have anything here because I forgot the very last important step of a countdown timer
you have to start it.
So here at the end of our curly bracket we're going to do dot start.
So do you see when we make this new countdown timer on this we did not start now if we'd put this in
a variable.
We would maybe call the variable name dot start but here we're just going to do that.
So let's run that one more time and now we should see something actually showing up here in log cabin.
So there it goes and look at this.
Eight seconds left seven six five four three two one zero.
No more countdown.
And that's it.
So the timer ran it's course did its thing totally awesome.
And I just want to show you just kind of for fun here if we drop this down to one hundred milliseconds
meaning this is going to run every tenth of a second.
And so let's go ahead and run this.
This will be kind of interesting to see.
OK.
So here comes the app and look at this.
So it's calling it much much more frequently.
You'll notice that it can't keep up with how many times it's supposed to be called.
So you know even though we were supposed to have it run every you know tenth of a second here it kind
of topped out at some situations right.
Like we've seen nine only showed up you know four times eight only showed up twice.
But anyways.
So not always perfect here with these timers but definitely two different ways that you can handle these.
We are then going to use this moving forward in our next step.
So remember I said you know I want to teach you new skills and then we're going to take those skills
and apply it to other stuff you've learned just make sure it's really cemented.
So let's go ahead to move forward to the egg timer.